A Brief Git & GitHub Walkthrough
======================================================================

This short tutorial shows how to use git with a GitHub workflow. A
quick Google of "git workflows" shows many, diverse results. This
article describes just one of the ways of using git with a
git-hosting service like GitHub.

In this document, the `$` symbol, represents the prompt. The editor
used in this tutorial is [vi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vi). A
short introduction to _vi_ is located at
[http://www.nuxified.org/vi_survival_guide](http://www.nuxified.org/vi_survival_guide).

## Basics

### Initial Use

To make things easier later on, you'll need to create a `.gitignore`
file. The `.gitignore` file specifiles files that will be excluded
from the repository. Some of these are binary files, and error
messages that are generated during compilation.

_.gitignore_ files are specific to a project type. A good place to
start in determining what a `.gitignore` file should contain is
<http://gitignore.io>. Specify the type of project in the field, then
click Generate, then copy the output to your clipboard.

Create a directory for the project, then cd into it:

    $ mkdir foobar
    $ cd foobar

Edit the .gitignore file in the current directory:

    $ vi .gitignore

Then, paste the contents that you have copied earlier.

You may now initialize the Git repository:

    $ git init

Initially, add all the files in the current directory:

    $ git add .

Then, commit the changes:

    $ git commit -m "Short description of your changes."


### Subsequent Uses

This section describes the basic commands that you're going to use,
when you already have a repository.

Create a branch that will hold your changes:

    $ git checkout -b experimental

If you want to add a file to the repository:

    $ git add Blah.java

When you have made changes to your files, stage them:

    $ git add -u

To display the changes that you have staged:

    $ git diff

To commit the changes:

    $ git commit -m "Summary of your modifications."

To display the commit log:

    $ git log

To display the list of commit messages, with the diffs:

    $ git log -p

When you've tested your changes to be stable, switch to the `master`
branch:

    $ git checkout master

Then merge with `experimental`:

    $ git merge experimental

After that, you may delete the experimental branch:

    $ git branch -d experimental


## Working Online

This section describes how to work with other developers. You're going
to use [GitHub](https://github.com) in this discussion.

### Generate your SSH keys

You need to be able to authenticate yourself to your GitHub account,
before you can push changes. To do that, you need to create your SSH
keys. To do that, run the following command. Make sure that you supply
a passphrase, when prompted:

    $ ssh-keygen -t rsa

After you have created your keys, you need to add that key to your
GitHub account. To do that, run the following command then copy the
output:

    $ cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub

Go to <https://github.com/settings/ssh>, then click _Add SSH key_

![Add SSH key](images/add-ssh-key.png)

Paste the key, then follow through.


### Creating a Repository

In your repositories page, create a new repository by clicking on
_New_

![New](images/new-repository.png)

Follow through the prompts. When you have filled in the required
fields, you'll get a string of commands. Replace `shoryuken` and
`foobar` with your GitHub username, and the name of the repository
that you have created, respectively:

    $ git remote add origin git@github.com:shoryuken/foobar.git
    $ git push -u origin master

You'll be prompted to supply the passphrase you have entered
above. The `git push` command uploads the contents of your repository
to the remote repository.


### Updating your Repository

When you have made further changes to the repository, you may push
your changes with the command:

    $ git push origin master


### Participation

If you want to contribute to a project, you'll need to work on a copy
of that repository, then push changes to your own fork.

First, fork the project. Go to the project that you want to fork, then
click the _Fork_ button

![Fork](images/fork.png)

This will create a copy of a repository in your own GitHub account.

Next, you need to clone that forked project, to your local disk. Copy
the URL located in the _SSH clone URL_ field:

![SSH clone URL](images/ssh-clone-url.png)

then run the following command, where `hadoken` is your username:

    $ git clone git@github.com:hadoken/foobar.git

Next, create a _remote_ that will track changes from the source
repository.

    $ git remote add upstream git@github.com:shoryuken/foobar.git

When you want to make changes to the code, create a separate branch.
Use a branch name that is descriptive of the changes that you want to
make. This name can be changed later. In this example, we'll create a
branch named `baz`:

    $ git checkout -b new-options

You may now make changes to the files in this branch. When you've
committed your changes, push the changes to your fork:

    $ git push origin new-options

If you want the source repository to merge your changes, create a
_Pull Request_ by going to the source repository's page, then click on _Pull Requests_.

![Pull Requests](images/pull-requests.png)

On the next page, click on _New Pull Request_:

![New Pull Request](images/new-pull-request.png)

Select _compare across forks_:

![Compare Across Forks](images/compare-across-forks.png)

In the left side, under the `base fork` field, select
`shoryuken/foobar`, and in the `base` field, select `master`. In the
right side, under `head fork` field, select `hadoken/foobar`, and in
the `compare` select `new-options`, or whatever name you used
above. Click _Create pull request_

![Create pull request](images/create-pull-request.png)

then follow through.


### Synchronizing with Upstream

To synchronize the upstream branch with the source repository, pull
changes from the upstream remote:

    $ git pull upstream master

Then push to your own repository:

    $ git push origin master


## Pulling Changes

If you are the owner of the source repository, and you want to pull in
changes from contributors, click _Pull requests_

![Pull requests](images/pull-requests.png)

from the repository page, then follow through.


## Merging with Upstream

If you are a contributor, and your changes have been pulled in the
source repository, synchronize your upstream branch:

    $ git pull upstream master

At this point, you may delete the `new-options` branch you have
created earlier:

    $ git branch -d new-options


## Closing Remarks

The workflow described in this document is only one of the many usable
workflows that one can use. This document serves as an introduction
for people who are new to Git and GitHub.
