    Title: Over, Under, and Elsewhere
    Date: 2013-05-09T16:08:36
    Tags: essays

Our cunning ability for oversight is deridingly high. Whether it may
be solving a problem or just trying to be creative. Our impulse to
over-engineer is unusually prevalent if our initial expectations are
not met. We drag our consciousness to lengths almost unfathomable
because we think that if we pour in a lot of thought, the outcome is
positively and proportionately high according to our convictions. We
complain about our lack of tools. We complain about our lack of
resources. Yet, we are astonished and brought to shocking disbelief
when someone does it with far less than what our hands have. We
disenchant the probability that what we are precisely looking for, is
right on our ear. Our ability to dismiss ideal options hulking right
in front of us, is appalling. Why do we need to dig an underground
tunnel to get in, when all that is needed is to knock?

<!-- more -->

It is very disturbing that we unjustifiably position ourselves to
unfailingly accept words just because we have been told to assimilate
them. We believe that they are truths without making the slightest
advance towards ensuring that what you just heard is infallible. It is
also disconcerting that for many, if not most, that they'd rather take
what they have been told, as is, rather than be criticized for raising
their hand to ask what could possibly be dubious claims. When we say
yes, without giving the slightest amount of thought, we have
effectively enveloped ourselves with a cloud-like cushion, that, while
it makes everything immediately adjacent from your skin heavenly, we
neglect to pursue the intellectual safety and we give ourselves
self-approved parachutes.

On a higher note, I also find that a lot of people radically position
themselves to absolute positions. We are very fond of inventing and
assigning labels among ourselves. We think that by moving ourselves to
thought-bunkers, we build assumptions that because of the security
that our bunker provides, we have prevailed. From our DNA that
provides us with the information that contains the code of what makes
us tick, we turn to our brains to store yet more information. These
various pieces of information and high in breadth, that our humble DNA
can no longer even begin to contain. But alas, what we have in our
individual brains is still not enough to house our ever-growing house
of knowledge. We needed to find a way to record them outside our
bodies, stored somewhere where data retrieval is one of its most
critical operations -- we wrote and created records. We began by
writing on stones, walls, and anything that would hopefully persist to
contain what it must, across generations of readers. We have built
colossal libraries, with gargantuan collections of books. With it, we
have stored an immense amount of records, far beyond what all the
brains of all humans can contain. Then, the libraries became computer
databases. We took yet another step in building tower houses of what
our ancestors knew, and what we know today. But both by intrigue and
disturbance, we see that not even our most advanced technology is able
to carefully record, with predictability, our coordinates in space in
time, for the past, present, and future. We are in a time wherein we
can, with high certainty, tell whether a drinking glass has something
in it or not.

Some of us persist in delusions that claim to know what they have
never ventured, or at the least, observed. It is very disheartening
that instead of taking a step back and gaze at the sky for a moment,
people instead immerse themselves in wonderland. This very
intoxicating habit, harms not an individual, but the whole
mankind. When someone tells you that answers to his questions can only
be exclusively be answered always by a yes or no, leave him and that
he no longer deserve to have your attention again. If you do not know
the answer, you should say that you do not know the answer, instead of
doing trapeze jumps without anyone to catch your hands.

Oftentimes, we overlook that all the tools that we need are right with
us.
